# PyDESeq

## Introduction
The goal of this project is to build a tool in Python that calculates the log2 fold change values and p-values from RESM and TPM results to perform differential expression analysis of two datasets, control vs. treatment. Additionally, the tool will generate a volcano plot for differential expression with log2 fold change values as the x-axis and the -log10 p-value as the y-axis and prints out the top 10 most differentially expressed genes. 

[Install Instructions](#install) | [Basic Usage](#usage) | [pydeseq Options](#options) | [File format](#format) | [Constributors](#credit)

<a name="install"></a>
## Install Instructions

`pydeseq` requires the following python libraries to be installed:

pandas
numpy 
scipy
matplotlib

If these packages are not yet installed, use the `pip` command:
```
pip install pandas numpy scipy matplotlib
```
If you do not have root access, you can run the command above with the additional `--user` option to install locally:  
```
pip install --user pandas numpy scipy matplotlib
```

pydeseq can be installed with the following commands:
```
git clone .....
cd PyDESeq/pydeseq

```

Typing `./pydeseq.py --help` should show a useful message and can be done to see if the install was successfull. 

<a name="usage"></a>
## Basic Usage
The basic usage of `./pydeseq.py` to process control and treatment files to calculate differential gene expression is:
```
./pydeseq.py [-h] -c {CONTROLS ...} -t {TREATMENTS ...} -g {m,h} [-p {PVALUE_THRESHOLD}] [-o {OUTPUT_DIR}]
```
To run `./pydeseq.py` on our test example files:
```
./pydeseq.py [-h] -c {CONTROLS ...} -t {TREATMENTS ...} -g {m,h} [-p {PVALUE_THRESHOLD}] [-o {OUTPUT_DIR}]
```

The code and the plots and csv file generated from my test 

This should output:

```
```


<a name="options"></a>
## pydeseq options
The required inputs for `./pydeseq.py` are:
- `-c`, `--controls`: Control file(s). 
- `t`, `--treatments`: Treetment file(s).
- `-g`, `--genome`: Genome type. `m` for mouse, `h` for human

Other additional options are:
- `-h`, `--help`: Shows the help message and exits
- `p`, `--pvalue_threshold`: Sets p-value threshold for the volcano plot. If no p-value threshold is inputed, a volcano plot will not be generated. 
- `-o`, `--output_dir`: Sets output directy for output files. If not directory is given, saves output files to current working directory. 

<a name="format"></a>
## File formats

### Inupt files

### Output files


<a name="credit"></a>
## Contributors
This repositiory was generated by Shania Bu, Amber Tse, Janice Wu for our CSE 185 final project, inspired by the R package [DESeq2](https://bioconductor.org/packages/release/bioc/html/DESeq2.html). 
